>> IsNewsReal Films
presents exciting news.
Is the divorce over?
Are spirit and science
tying the knot once more?
Are the church
and the laboratory
saying the same thing?
Out of the misty
ages of antiquity,
the quest for the
divine and the quest
for knowledge about the
universe march hand-in-hand.
Ancient Sumer, there
was a god of astronomy,
a god of horticulture,
a god of irrigation.
And the temple priests were
the scribes and technologists
investigating these
fields of knowledge.
Ancient Greece, philosophers
asking the questions
of why are we here
developed the theory
of the atom, celestial
movements and human ethics.
Medieval Europe,
the Western church
rose to a position
of supreme power.
Kingmaker, landowner,
and purveyor
of the truth, the church
took it upon themselves
to be the one knower
of everything.
The dogma was law.
Yet science had moved forward
and now challenged the dogma
that the Earth was the
center of the universe.
Copernicus, Bruno,
and Galileo all
felt the heavy
hand of the church.
The Tragedy-- unable to
suppress science anymore,
the church and science divided
knowledge and human endeavor.
Descartes invented dualism.
The church had the
unseen, science the seen,
and materialism was born.
An uneasy truce-- scientists
were no longer being bound.
And they reacted
with a vengeance.
All the unseen is
fantasy, delusion.
We are strictly little
machines running
in a predictable machine
universe governed
by strict immutable laws.
The church pushed back,
soulless scientists
were condemned to hell.
Darwin countered, the
creator was nothing, nowhere.
We are random mutations,
simply a carrier
of DNA's relentless quest for
more in a meaningless universe.
And meanwhile, both science and
religion were hitting the wall.
If everything was mechanistic
and God was the only creator,
then what were we
humans supposed to do?
Science dug ever deeper
into a dead universe
and stumbled upon and
unlocked a mystery.
In tiny corners
of space and time,
scientists found
unfathomable energy
and mind-numbing
mysteries, mysteries
that suggest we
are all connected,
that the physical universe
is essentially non-physical.
Time and space are
just constructs
of this non-materialness.
And today, renegade
scientists are
meeting with religious leaders.
Conferences pushing forward a
meeting of science and spirit
are springing up.
As the 20th century
blew open the doors
of a mechanistic view,
will the 21st century
blow down the iron wall between
the church and laboratory?
This is your IsNewsReal
reporter signing off.
>> The rabbit hole and how deep
and how far we want to go is
really how far, how much do
you want to discover about
your true nature.
>> Alice went down the rabbit
hole where she met the Mad
Hatter.
The Hatter was mad.
And the idea was you want to
get out of the rabbit hole
after you've gone in.
So there's two
stages to science.
There's the crazy part where
you go down the rabbit hole.
And then there's
the part where you
check the craziness
of your ideas
against a rigorous, strict,
straitjacket-like process.
>> I think the interesting
thing about science,
the interesting thing
about physics is that it is
a genuinely new and novel way
of trying to come to grips with
the world.
I think the experimental method
which is important to physics
is a very different business
from the method of revelation
or the method of meditation
or something like that.
I don't think it's true that,
for example, adherents of, say,
Buddhism could imagine
changing their beliefs based
on the outcomes of
some experiments people
do with electrons.
>> Quite this apparent rift
between the church and science
or between science and
religion emerged today.
I think the roots of
that are very deep.
Because it probably goes
back to a conviction
that some of the books
of the scriptures
like the book of Genesis,
which deals with beginnings,
is actually telling us about
the origins of the world.
Now, in fact, any biblical
scholar will tell you,
and this is not news,
that the book of Genesis
was never meant to be about
the origins of the world.
But many churchmen believed
that in the book of Genesis,
you had actual sort
of live news like CNN
about the beginnings of
creation and therefore you
had many people down
through the ages,
like the famous Archbishop
James Ussher in Ireland in 1650
who calculated all the ages
of the patriarchs back along
and worked out to
his own satisfaction
that the creation of the world
occurred in the year 4004
BC on the 17th of September
at 9 o'clock in the morning.
>> I think that there must
be a scientific explanation
for spirituality.
I don't think there's been
a good one until recently.
To me, the only one
that makes sense
is that proto-consciousness,
platonic values, goodness,
truth exist at this fundamental
level of spacetime geometry
which can influence our
actions if we're open to them
and interconnect us
to all other beings,
to the universe at large.
[WIND RUSHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(RAPPING) It's time to get wise.
>> Science creates the
stories that we live by.
And science has told
us a very bleak story.
It's told us that we're some
sort of genetic mistake,
that we have genes
that use us, basically,
to move on to the
next generation
and that we randomly mutate.
It's said that we are
outside of our universe,
that we are alone,
that we are separate
and that we are the
sort of lonely mistake
on a lonely planet
in a lonely universe.
And that informs our
view of the world.
It informs our
view of ourselves.
And we're now realizing
that this view,
this view of separateness is one
of the most destructive things.
It's the thing that creates
all the problems in the world.
>> (RAPPING) It's
time to get wise.
>> And we're now realizing
that that paradigm is wrong,
that we aren't separate.
We are all one.
We're all together.
At the very nether most element
of our being, we are connected.
And so we're trying to
understand and absorb what
are the implications of that.
What does this really
mean to me in my life?
>> We need a new
spiritual milieu.
We need a new spiritual
way of understanding
the nature of what it
is to be a human being.
Because the old ways,
the old mythologies,
the old monarchy king god versus
the old lawful scientist's way
of doing everything are dead.
They need to be buried.
We need a new
realm, a new vision.
And I think quantum
physics, if anything,
could help us get a step
up in the right direction.
>> I think the key aspect
of the new paradigm,
at least in medicine,
which is my little piece,
is that consciousness is
real and has an impact.
>> We have to go beyond
our senses to create a new
paradigm.
>> It may very well be that
what's going on inside of you,
in your brain, in
your nervous system,
in your nature of
observation, how memory works,
how the mind works, it may very
well be that what is happening
there is some kind
of observer-matter
interrelationship which is
indeed making things real
for you, affecting how
you perceive reality.
It's not changing the
reality out there.
You know, you're not changing
big chairs and big trucks
and bulldozers and
rockets taking off.
You're not changing those, no.
But you're changing
how you perceive things
and maybe how you
think about things,
how you feel about things,
how you sense the world.
>> The infinite information that
the brain is processing every
single second tells us that
there's more to the world than
we're perceiving.
However, every single time
we're immersed in an experience
with our senses, seeing,
smelling, tasting,
feeling, as we're immersed
centrally in our reality.
>> We know nothing
about reality.
All of our sense of
so-called reality out
there is filtered
through our sense organs.
>> The brain processes 400
billion bits of information
a second, but we're only
aware of 2,000 of those.
That means that reality
is happening in the brain
all the time.
>> You should try it.
How do I know what I'm doing?
I and the vase are one.
Hey, it might help
your work, too.
>> I live through my eyes.
I feel in reality.
>> Not just some
nebulous, nothing,
touchy-feely world of
shifting whatevers?
>> If it's real,
I want to see it.
>> The eyes are, in some
senses, a camcorder.
Because they are taking
that information and they're
storing it.
But you're not
really able to get
it to mean anything until you
actually put it all together.
So in some senses, it
requires the editor's table
to really put the
whole thing together
to put the movie together of
what your life and your world
is actually about.
>> If I get out of bed
in the morning, OK,
and I suddenly decide to take
very seriously the claim,
which is surely a true claim,
that I don't know for sure
if my eyes are
working correctly, OK,
so that for all I know, even
though it looks like there is
a stable floor by
the side of my bed,
there might be a cliff or
something like that, OK?
If I am unable to order
those possibilities in terms
of probabilities that
I assign to them,
then I'm not going
to get out of bed.
It seems to me I'm paralyzed
in the most literal sense
of the word, OK?
I'm going to have no idea how
to literally take the next step.
It's definitely the
case that we know
that my eyes might, in
principle, be deceiving me
at any moment.
We've had experience of
people before subject
to hallucinations.
And even if we
didn't, we don't know
how to prove, as a
fundamental matter,
that our eyes never deceive us.
That's absolutely right.
But when we make the decision to
get out of bed in the morning,
we are assigning probabilities
to the various hypotheses
compatible with my seeing
a floor by the bed.
One hypothesis is there
really is a floor there
and that's why I'm seeing it.
Another hypothesis is my seeing
the floor is a hallucination
and there's a cliff there.
By getting out of
bed in the morning
you endorse one of those
hypotheses as more likely
than another.
[SCREAMS]
>> Well, ultimate
reality, I think,
very frequently depends a lot
on how a person perceives it
and what they actually think is
the real reality of our world.
>> If the brain is processing
400 billion bits of information
and our awareness
is only on 2000,
that means reality is happening
in the brain all the time.
It's receiving that
information, and yet we
haven't integrated it.
But if we're given knowledge
and information outside
of convention, outside the box
of convention, where, say, we
merge quantum physics and
neurophysiology and the brain
is asked to contemplate or
we're asked to contemplate on it
and examine the what ifs and
possibilities and potentials
and associate our knowns with
our experience of what we know
and repeat it over and
over again, the brain
is going to start to integrate
two independent neural nets
and it's going to
create a new vision.
And that new vision is going
to be like taking a flashlight
and shining it from those
2000 bits of information that
have to do with our body
and our environment in time,
slightly over in the dark
and looking at something new.
That's called realization.
>> You OK?
I heard you scream earlier.
Was it another dream?
You were an Indian watching
Columbus's ship materialize out
of thin air.
Wow.
And this medicine
man kept hitting you.
Cool.
Hey, maybe it was a past
life or a parallel reality
or a future life.
>> Get real.
>> Or maybe that dream was
trying to tell you the truth.
I guess it just depends
on what you think is real.
Maybe you should try
different anxiety pills.
>> My pills are fine, OK?
Thank you.
>> Well, I have
to go get dressed.
I hope you feel better, Amanda.
>> God, Amanda, you
can be such an asshole.
>> People ask me, why does
quantum mechanics matter,
given that it's little,
tiny stuff and who cares?
There are three
possible answers.
From a practical point of view,
it doesn't make any difference
at all.
I mean, you still have to go
to work and drive your car
and do all the rest of it.
From a second point
of view, actually, it
infiltrates everything in the
world, especially the world
of electronics.
When you go to the
supermarket and you
do the scanning at
the checkout, that's
a quantum mechanical effect.
But I think the
important part is
the third one,
which is essentially
a philosophical issue.
Why are philosophers
so passionate
about deconstruction the
assumptions of the world?
I finally got it.
I got it as a result of
looking at quantum mechanics
and comparing it to
classical mechanics.
They present two very different
ways of thinking about the way
that the world works
and about what we are.
So from a classical
perspective, we are machines.
And a machine, there is no room
for a conscious experience.
It doesn't matter
if a machine dies.
You can kill a machine.
You can throw it in a dump.
It doesn't matter.
If that is the way
that the world is,
then people will
behave in that way.
But there's another way of
thinking about the world which
is suggested, it's pointed to
by quantum mechanics, which
suggested that the world is
not this clockwork thing,
but it's more like an organism.
It's a highly interconnected
organismic thing of some type
which extends through
space and time.
In that kind of
environment, what I think
and the way that I behave
has a much greater impact,
not only on myself,
but on the rest
of the world, than it would
if it was a classical world.
So from a very
basic point of view
having to do with morals
and ethics, what I think
affects the world.
I mean, in a sense,
that's really
the key for why a worldview
change is important.
>> Let's talk about
the subatomic world.
And then we'll talk about what
it's telling us about reality.
The first thing I want to tell
you about the subatomic world
is it's totally
a fantasy created
by mad physicists
trying to figure out
what the heck is
going on when they
do these little experiments.
By little experiments,
I mean big energy
in little spaces in
little pieces of time.
It gets pretty nutty at
that realm of things.
And so subatomic
physics was invented
to try to figure that all out.
We need a new
science down there.
It's called quantum physics.
And it is subject to a whole
range of debatable hypotheses,
thoughts, feelings, intuitions
as to what the heck is really
going on.
>> So on the one hand,
you had a theory which,
from the conceptual standpoint,
was profoundly puzzling
and on the other hand, from
a practical standpoint,
was vastly more successful
than anything we had ever seen
before.
This was the kind of situation
that produces the tension
that all of the
investigations of foundations
of quantum mechanics are
feeding off of since then.
Because on the one
hand, this is an acutely
paradoxical, puzzling,
conceptually confusing theory.
On the other hand,
we have no option
along the lines of throwing
it out or neglecting it
because it is the most powerful,
proven tool for predicting
the behaviors of
physical systems
that we have ever
had in our hands.
>> The universe is very strange.
There seem to be two sets of
laws that govern the universe.
In our everyday,
classical world,
meaning at roughly our
size and timescales,
things are described by
Newton's laws of motion,
set down hundreds and
hundreds of years ago.
And they worked very well
for billiard balls and cannon
balls and gravity.
However, when we get
down to a small scale,
when we get down to,
say, the level of atoms,
a different set
of laws take over.
These are the quantum
laws, quantum theory,
quantum mechanics.
And at that level, particles
may be in multiple places
at the same time.
They may behave as waves smeared
out spatially and temporally.
They may be interconnected
over great distances.
They may be unified
into one quantum state,
into one state governed
by one wave function.
And the borderline,
the threshold,
this curtain between the quantum
world and the classical world
is really mysterious.
It's called, sometimes, the
collapse of the wave function.
Because in the quantum
world, everything
is in superposition of
multiple possibilities.
In the classical world,
these multiple possibilities
seem to collapse to
particular definite choices
so everything is in
one particular place.
>> Quantum mechanics is
really the play and display
of information, the play
and display of potentiality,
waves of information, waves
of potential electron.
And it's important,
the word potential.
This isn't the
world of electrons,
it's the world of
potential electrons.
But you have to ask the
question, waves of what,
really?
What is the field
that is waving?
Is it the ocean?
No.
It's a universal ocean, an
ocean of pure potentiality,
an ocean of abstract
potential existence.
We call it the unified
field or super string field.
And that's what
we're made out of.
>> Connectivity,
among all things,
is a basic constituent
of the fabric of reality.
It's very difficult to
wrap your mind around that.
But Erwin Schrodinger said, he's
one of the founders of quantum
mechanics, that
entanglement, which
is this idea of
this connectivity,
is not just a property
of quantum mechanics,
it's the property.
It's the property of quantum
mechanics that makes it
very, very strange.
And it doesn't seem to fit
in with our ordinary world
or ordinary experience.
But in fact, it actually does.
>> You want to shoot some hoops?
Man, you don't have
to be like that.
Come on and play.
Look, he likes you.
Don't you have time for
a little one on one?
How long has it been
since you played?
Come on, you got the ball.
Take a shot.
No, no, no, milady,
not from there.
It's out of bounds.
You gotta be on the
court to be in play.
Welcome to Duke Reginald's
court of unending possibilities.
Court rules.
Gotta sink the last one.
>> That hurt.
>> It never touched you.
>> Right.
>> And it's not solid.
This ball is mostly empty.
>> We were all taught in
school that the world is made
of stuff, of matter,
of mass, of atoms.
Atoms make up molecules,
molecules make up materials,
and everything is made of that.
But atoms actually
are mostly empty.
For example, if this
ball were the nucleus
of an atom, a proton in a
hydrogen atom, for example,
then the electron
circling this which
would describe the outer
limits of that atom
would be out by that
mountain over there
roughly 20 miles away.
And everything in
between is empty.
In fact, the universe
is mostly empty.
However, when we go down
in scale in the emptiness,
we eventually come to a
level, the fundamental level
of spacetime geometry, the fine
basement level of the universe
where there's information,
there's a pattern.
It's called the Planck scale.
And it's the fabric
of the universe.
And at that level,
there's information that's
been there since the Big Bang.
So most of the universe, even
of matter, is actually empty.
>> Most people think
that the vacuum is empty.
But for internal
self-consistency
of quantum mechanics
and relativity theory,
there is required to
be the equivalent of 10
to the 94 grams of mass
energy, each gram being E
equals MC squared
kind of energy.
Now, that's a huge number, but
what does it mean practically?
Practically, if I can assume
that the universe is flat,
and more and more
astronomical data is showing
it's pretty darn flat,
if I can assume that,
then if I take the
volume or take the vacuum
within a single hydrogen
atom that's about 10
to the minus 23
cubic centimeters.
If I take that amount of vacuum
and I take the latent energy
in that, there is a
trillion times more energy
there than in all of the
mass of all of the stars
and all of the planets out
to 20 billion light-years.
That's big.
And if consciousness
allows you to control
even a small fraction of
that, creating a big bang
is no problem.
>> Organizations like NASA,
British aerospace are all
trying to tap into
this incredible,
unimaginably large energy sea.
And they feel if
they can tap this,
we can travel to
different galaxies.
So they understand
that in empty space,
there is this
unbelievable energy.
>> The major, basic idea that
quantum physics implies which
makes us understand this or even
think about this new paradigm,
the thing which is, is that
there's this underground,
there's gotta be a realm of
existence which cannot be ever,
you know, touched on
or seen which bubbles
into the existence giving
rise to our understanding
of the world.
>> The tighter physics have
tried to grasp on to physical
reality, to understand what
it's really made of, what are
the core building
blocks of life?
At the basis of it
all, life, the universe
slips through your
fingers and you come up
with something that's
increasingly abstract,
to come to the realm
of pure abstraction.
And that's what the
unified field is.
It's pure abstract potential,
pure abstract being,
pure abstract self-aware
consciousness,
which rises in
waves of vibration
to give rise to the
particles, the people,
everything we see in
the vast universe.
>> What makes up things
are not of more things,
but what makes up things are
ideas, concepts, information.
>> And like I said,
it never touches.
>> Another strange fact is that
objects never really touch each
other.
When I dribble this
ball, the atoms
of the ball and the atoms of
the ground never actually meet.
>> So nobody touches nothing.
Come on, put your stuff down.
Nobody's gonna take it.
Like I said, this is my court.
It's no problem.
How long has it been?
>> I'll be late.
>> The first inkling in
physics that we got that time
ain't what it seemed to
be came with relativity.
That was the first inkling
that time was not absolute.
It was not the absolute
ruler of the universe,
that God almighty did not
say one second and one second
and one second and one
second or one meter
or one meter or one meter.
You're in a gravitational field.
Your head is actually moving
at a slightly faster rate
than your feet.
>> The second law of
thermodynamics says that things
unwind and move forward.
So that gives an arrow of time.
But at the quantum world,
in the micro world,
the second law of thermodynamics
doesn't seem to hold,
and things can go
backwards or be timeless.
>> The fundamental equations of
physics have a property which
is referred to as time
reversal symmetry.
And what time reversal
symmetry means
is that a set of laws which
are time reversal symmetric
are laws that have
the following feature.
For any process that's in
accord with those laws,
the same process going
backwards is exactly as much
in accord with those laws, OK?
That ought to mean
that milk jumps out
of coffee as often as it
dissolves into it, that people
get younger looking as often as
they get older looking, that we
have the same kind of
access vis a vis knowledge
to the future as we do to
the past, that by acting now
we ought to be able to
influence the past just as much
as we can influence the future.
All of that is wrong.
All of that, that is,
comes into violent conflict
with the way we psychologically
experience the world.
>> One of the most
unpalatable ideas, still,
in spite of the fact that
quantum physics has been around
a long time is the possibility
or the notion that the future
can have a causative
effect on the present.
We believe that the past
can have a causative effect
on the present.
I hold the ball, I drop it,
it falls, cause, [CLICK],,
effect when it hits the ground.
But could the
ground be the cause
of my dropping the ball
in the first place?
>> It's only in conscious
experience that it seems that
we move forward in time.
In quantum theory, you can
also go backwards in time.
And there's some
suggestion that processes
in the brain related to
consciousness project backwards
in time.
For example, in the late
1970s, a neurophysiologist
at University of
California San Francisco
named Ben Libet did some
very famous experiments.
What Libet did was
to study patients
who were having
neurosurgery on their brains
with their brains exposed
while they were awake.
They were given a
local anesthetic
to numb the area of
the skull and scalp
to access their brains
and they were awake
and Ben would talk
to these people.
So for example,
what he did was he
would stimulate
their little finger
and look at the part
of the sensory cortex
on the opposite side
that was related to that,
record from it electrically,
and ask the patient
when he or she felt the
stimulus on the little finger.
And he would also stimulate at
that particular area of cortex.
Now what you would
think would be
that if you stimulate
the little finger,
it takes a finite
period of time to get
to the opposite
side of the cortex
so the patient would report
it a fraction of a second
later, after the stimulus and
when you stimulate it directly,
the patient would
report it immediately.
He found just the opposite.
When you stimulate
the little finger,
the patient felt it immediately.
And when he stimulated
directly on the cortex,
there was a delay.
After sorting
through all the data
and repeating this
over and over,
Libet came to the conclusion
that somehow the brain
was projecting information
backwards in time
so that it did take a
finite amount of time
to get to the sensory cortex
but the brain projected it
backwards in time so that
the conscious perception was
that the stimulus was felt when
the pinch actually occurred.
>> There have been some studies
which have shown that when
people are beginning to move
a hand or beginning to say
something, that there's
actually activity in the brain,
in certain nerve
cells of the brain,
even before they become
consciously aware of what
they're trying to do.
>> I know it seems to me that I
often do things and then decide
a fraction of a second
later what to do,
but I've already done them.
>> I'll be late.
>> You could always
go back in time.
[SHUTTERS SNAPPING]
[CHEERING]
[BUZZER SOUNDING]
What's the matter?
Remember, it's empty.
>> How do you know this shit?
>> I read Dr. Quantum comics.
Everybody thinks it's just kid
stuff, but I know it's real.
That's how I do my
magic on the court.
>> Know what they taught us in
school isn't really the way it
is and that our senses
are playing tricks on us.
You just gotta wonder,
what is this reality
that we find ourselves in?
Quantum physics says it's all
just waves of information.
Do I believe that?
Uh, I hope so.
Yikes!
>> That's how I do my
magic on the court.
>> Yeah, I always choose
the wonder boy first.
>> Dr. Quantum says
everybody's got it.
Everybody's doing it,
doing it constantly,
each and every time you look.
>> And here we are, the
granddaddy of all quantum
weirdness, the infamous
double slit experiment.
To understand this
experiment, we first
need to see how particles or
little balls of matter can.
If we randomly shoot
a small object, say,
a marble, at the screen, we
see a pattern on the back wall
where they went through
the slit and hit.
Now, if we add a
second slit, we would
expect to see a second band
duplicated to the right.
Now, let's look at waves.
The wave hit the
slit and radiate out,
striking the back wall
with the most intensity
directly in line with the slit.
The line of brightness
on the back screen
shows that intensity.
This is similar to the
line the marbles make.
But when we add the second slit,
something different happens.
If the top of one wave meets
the bottom of another wave,
they cancel each other out.
So now there is an interference
pattern on the back wall.
Places where the two tops meet
are the highest intensity,
the bright lines.
And where they cancel,
there is nothing.
So when we throw things, that
is matter, through two slits,
we get this--
two bands of hits.
And with waves, we get
an interference pattern
of many bands.
Good so far.
Now, let's go quantum.
An electron is a tiny, tiny bit
of matter, like a tiny marble.
Let's fire a stream
through one slit.
It behaves just like the
marble, a single band.
So if we shoot these tiny
bits through two slits,
we should get, like
the marbles, two bands.
What?
An interference pattern.
We fired electrons, tiny
bits of matter through,
but we get a pattern like
waves, not like little marbles.
How?
How could pieces of matter
create an interference pattern
like a wave?
It doesn't make sense.
But physicists are clever.
They thought, maybe
those little balls
are bouncing off each other
and creating that pattern.
So they decide to shoot
electrons through one
at a time.
There is no way they could
interfere with each other.
But after an hour of this,
the same interference pattern
is seen to emerge.
The conclusion is inescapable.
The single electron
leaves as a particle,
becomes a wave of potentials,
goes through both slits,
and interferes with itself to
hit the wall like a particle.
But mathematically,
it's even stranger.
It goes through both slits
and it goes through neither.
And it goes through just one and
it goes through just the other.
All of these possibilities
are in superposition
with each other.
But physicists were
completely baffled by this,
so they decided to
peek and see which
slit it actually goes through.
They put a measuring
device by one slit
to see which one it went
through and let it fly.
But the quantum world
is far more mysterious
than they could have imagined.
When they observed,
the electron went back
to behaving like
a little marble.
It produced a pattern of two
bands, not an interference
pattern of many.
The very act of
measuring or observing
which split it went
through meant it only
went through one, not both.
The electron decided to act
differently as though it
was aware it was being watched.
And it was here that
physicists stepped forever
into the strange neverworld
of quantum events.
What is matter?
Marbles or waves?
And waves of what?
And what does an observer
have to do with any of this?
The observer collapsed the wave
function simply by observing.
>> We are always the observer,
but sometimes we identify with
the event so much so that
we even lose the aspect
of the observer.
That's why the materialist
gets totally lost
and thinks that we could
do without the observer.
>> The physics data tells us
that an object itself is really
a simplification for
what we call out there.
One is particularly
when we're looking
at atomic and
subatomic particles
or atomic and subatomic
matter in any form, what
we find is how we
go to look at it
and what we choose to
examine it with actually
changes the properties of what
we observe to be out there.
>> Is this the observer which
is so intricate to understanding
the wacky, weird world of
quantum particles and how they
react?
Is this, then, the observer?
And even though we cannot
have a quantum field without
the observation of scientists
who have gone there who have
uncovered it layer
after layer after layer,
they're all observers.
But not one of them
agree conclusively
on all points in the
field because they
are perceiving the
field mathematically
from different
angles of perception.
>> We don't know in quantum
mechanics how to hook ourselves
as observers up with the world.
We don't know how
to treat ourselves
as observers, as just another
part of the physical system
that we're describing.
The only way we know how to
do quantum mechanics as it's
traditionally
formulated is to keep
the observer outside of the
system you're describing.
The minute you put him in,
you get all these paradoxes
and we're forced to say
things in quantum mechanics
like, look, the book is
doing what it's doing
because of quantum mechanics.
And I see that because
I'm there and I see it.
And you better not try to
analyze that second part
of the sentence in
terms of applying
quantum mechanics to it because
it's going to break down.
That's why there are these two
separate laws of the evolutions
of physical systems,
one that applies
when you're not looking
at them, the other that
applies when you are.
But that's crazy.
>> There's no way that we're
ever going to mathematize
or put into a mathematical
formula this very act in which
a conscious observer
comes up with the answer.
People say, oh, the measuring
instruments, the recorder
records it and there it is,
it's on the tape, it's recorded.
You forgot one part
of the equation,
somebody has to
look at the tape.
And until somebody
looks at the tape,
it ain't recorded it at all.
>> When you are not looking,
there are waves of possibility.
When we are looking, then there
are particles of experience.
>> A particle, which we
think of as a solid thing,
really exists in a
so-called superposition,
a spread out wave of
possible locations,
and it's an all
of those at once.
The instant you check on
it, it snaps into just one
of those possible positions.
>> It's easy to generate
situations where the equations
of motion will predict that,
say, the wave function,
the psi of a certain basketball,
is uniformly distributed all
over the basketball.
We don't have any idea
what a state like that
would look like.
According to the law
of quantum mechanics,
that's supposed to be a
state in which it fails
to make any sense even
to ask the question,
where is the basketball?
That is, according to the
law of quantum mechanics,
asking the question where
is a basketball whose
psi is uniformly distributed
over a whole basketball court
is the logical
equivalent of asking
about, say, the marital
status of the number five, OK?
It's not that you
don't know the answer,
you don't happen to know
whether the number 5 is married
or a bachelor, it's that
the question somehow
is radically inappropriate
in the first place.
The number 5 doesn't
have a marital status.
There's nothing
there to ask about.
And similarly, a basketball
whose wave function
is uniformly distributed over
the entire basketball court
would not have a position
that could even coherently
be asked about.
Now, the crux of the
measurement problem
is precisely that, although the
Schrodinger equation predicts
under certain circumstances,
circumstances which
we basically know how to
reproduce in a laboratory,
that basketballs should
go into states like that,
states where there fails to
be any intelligible facts,
any sensible question,
even, about where they are.
And yet, when we go look at the
basketball court in situations
like that, we invariably see
either a basketball over here
or a basketball over there
or a basketball over there.
The fact that we
see the basketball
in some specific location
as opposed to seeing it
in some science fiction
state that we can't even
imagine what it looks
like where there fails
to be a question about what
its location is, the fact
that we always see it in
some definite location
is an explicit violation of
these equations of motion.
And it's exactly there that the
measurement problem comes up.
>> When you observe,
things happen.
When you don't, they don't.
>> Superheroes use superposition
with the world being potential
strips of reality
until we choose.
Heroes choose what they want,
being in many places at once,
experiencing many
possibilities all at once,
and then collapsing on the one.
The question is, how
far down the rabbit hole
do you want to go?
>> Your own mind is creating
multiple possibilities
in your subconscious.
The superpositions
of possibilities
are in your subconscious.
I mean, you may be
consciously aware of them,
but they exist, I
think, in superposition
with multiple possibilities
which after awhile will
collapse to one or the other.
>> Project or plan into the
future or cast a thought ahead
of itself.
>> Nice shot.
>> But the
great-great-granddaddy of wacky
quantum weirdness
is entanglement.
If time reversal symmetry
destroys the notion of time,
then entanglement crushes
our experience of space.
Two objects, two electrons
created together are entangled.
Send one to the other
side of the universe.
Now, do something to one, and
the other responds instantly.
Instantly.
So either information is
traveling infinitely fast,
or in reality, they
are still connected.
They are entangled.
And since everything was
entangled at the moment
of the Big Bang, that means
everything is still touching.
Space is just a construct that
gives the illusion that there
are separate objects.
Are we far enough down
the rabbit hole yet?
>> You now can see in numerous
labs around the United States
objects that are large enough
to be seen by the naked eye
and they are in two
places simultaneously.
You can actually take
a photograph of them.
Now, I suppose if you showed
a photograph, they'd say,
oh, great here's this
nice blob of colored light
and I see there's a bit of
it over here and a little bit
here.
So you got a picture of two
dots, what's the big deal?
Superposition is pre-detection.
What I was speaking about in
the film is post-detection.
Now, under normal
circumstances, a single object,
once it has been detected,
is in just one position.
However, there are
states of matter
that have been created
now in which objects
can be in multiple
positions simultaneously,
not just two, but actually
as many as 3,000 positions.
The first of these
objects were called
Bose-Einstein condensates.
And they are single
wave functions,
meaning they are
single particles.
But even though they're
a single wave function,
the wave function has
multiple positions.
And so we'll look, look, look,
right in the chamber, you know,
you can see it right there.
Oh, I see two things there.
No, no, no, that's not two
things, that's one thing.
It's the same thing
in two places.
The tricky point here is
that it's still a single wave
function.
It's not 3,000 separate
wave functions,
it's one wave function.
So it's one particle.
I'm not sure that
people's jaw would
drop about it because I don't
think people really believe it.
I don't mean that people
say, oh, you're lying
or, oh, the scientists
are confused,
I think it is so mysterious
that you can't even
understand how amazing it is.
One particle in 3,000
different locations.
>> Now, if you were
to weigh one of them,
would it weigh 1/3000th?
>> Well, you can't
weigh one of them.
>> Why?
>> Because it's one particle.
It's just-- It's is one
indivisible particle.
>> But if it's--
but if it's in
different locations,
can't you put a scale under one?
>> No, it's inseparable.
This is the tricky
conceptual part.
It's not 3,000 separate parts.
>> Even though it
looks that way?
>> Right.
You can look at it.
And, I mean, you can't actually
see the one with 3,000.
But you can look at
the simpler ones,
the ones that are two or three
or four and you can see them.
You can see, as I say,
if you go onto the web,
you'll see photographs of these.
And you'll see these little
dots floating in space.
These are the different
parts of one object.
They're not separable.
It's not four different objects
or six different objects,
it's one wave function,
it's one object.
>> That's a real
brain fart, isn't it?
Because when you think about
it, wait a minute, no, no, no,
they're, like, here, here,
here, so it's obviously
one, two, three.
>> No, and you can't pull
one away from the others.
If you try to pull one
away from the others,
the entire thing
will just disappear.
And then furthermore, you
know, you've seen "Star Trek"
and whatnot, "Beam
me up, Scotty."
>> "Beam me up, Scotty."
>> So it all seems sort
of, oh, well, you know,
what does that really mean?
But you've got to
really stop and think
about what that means,
that it's the same object
and it's in two places at once.
And then people
tinker in the lab
and they get angry about
things and they have lunch
and they go home and they
lead their lives just as
though nothing utterly
astounding is happening.
Because, of course, that's
how you have to go about it.
And yet there is this completely
amazing magic sitting right
in front of your eyes.
[PHONE RINGING]
>> Where the hell are you?
I've got a studio
full of people,
but oh my god, there's
no photographer.
Where?
Where can she be?
Aliens?
Loch Ness Monster?
Or a hot date?
>> We took two simple
black boxes like this.
Inside is a very
simple electric circuit
with a few diodes,
an oscillator, EPROM,
some resistors and capacitors.
Basically, that's it.
We wrapped one in
aluminum foil, we
put it in an electrically
grounded Faraday cage.
The other we set on a
tabletop around which four,
very well qualified
meditators, highly inner self
managed individuals sit.
And they go into a
deep meditative state.
They cleanse the environment.
They make it, essentially,
a sacred space
using their mind
cleansing procedures
and their intentions.
And then one of the four
speaks the specific intention
for this device.
The intention is to influence
a particular target experiment.
It might be to increase the
pH of the purified water
by one full pH or to decrease
the pH by one full pH unit.
We've used these devices
on all those experiments
and have been
robustly successful.
In the meditative
process, then after one
speaks the particular
intention, it's
held various ways by the
four for maybe 15 minutes.
And then so be it, it's let go.
And then a subsidiary
intention is
stated to seal that
imprint into the device.
We take one of these devices
with its aluminum foil,
we put it in a soft package.
We put in a FedEx packet.
We ship it 2,000 miles
away to the laboratory
we're using up in Minnesota.
And soon as it arrives there it
goes into its own electrically
grounded Faraday cage.
The next day we do the
same with the control.
The experiment is running,
and basically then one
just takes the
device out, sets it
beside the experiment
within 6 inches to a foot,
and turns it on for a
period time, that's it.
Now, we learned over
some period of time
that there was another factor.
We found that the use of
these, we call them intention
imprinted electrical
devices, the continued use
of this somehow
conditions the space
to some higher
level of symmetry.
And we start getting
new phenomena,
that is, the devices work.
That is, the pH which
is normal starts
rising one full pH if
that was the imprint,
or it starts dropping.
If you go one full pH unit
or beyond, you're dead.
I mean, that's what
it means to a human.
>> REG machines, random event
generators are electronic
tosses of the coin.
>> One type of random
number generator experiment
that's been conducted
many, many times,
hundreds of times over the past
four decades or so since around
the 1960s has been a random
generator that only produces
sequences of random bits, zeros
and ones, like flipping coins.
And you would simply ask
somebody to press a button,
it would produce 200 bits.
And you would ask
them to say, well,
try to make it produce more
one bit than zero bits.
And when you take the
entire body of literature,
all of the hundreds
of experiments
that have been done, you
can ask a single question,
did it matter that people were
trying to push it towards ones
or push it towards zeros?
And the overall answer
is, yes, it does matter,
that somehow intention is
correlated with the operation,
with the output of these
random number generators,
such that if you
wish for more ones,
somehow the generators
produce more ones.
>> So when they talk about
in quantum physics being
a completely arbitrary
and random process,
what they're not accounting
for is the extraordinary effect
of human thought,
of human intention.
>> When the OJ Simpson trial was
going on, a lot of people were
watching television because of
the courtroom drama that was
unfolding.
And Radin intuited
that there must
be a lot of intention
going on at the time
when the courtroom
drama is strong.
So he hired a bunch of
psychologists who kept
track of the courtroom drama.
At the same time, Radin
was studying the behavior
of random number generators.
But then Radin found that
whenever the intentions were
strong in the
courtroom, that's when
the deviation of
these random number
generators from randomness
becomes very high.
>> This leads naturally to
wonder are people affecting
the world of reality
that they see?
You betcha they are.
Every single one of us affects
the reality that we see.
Even if we try to hide
from that and play victim,
we all are doing it.
>> Just tell me where you are?
Good.
Well, just hurry,
will you, please?
Because these models are
giving me a headache.
>> 10 minutes.
[SHUTTER SNAPS]
[SCREAMS]
>> Our snowflake exhibit
comes to us from Japan and Mr.
Masaru Emoto.
Mr. Emoto became
terribly interested
in the molecular structure
of water and what affects it.
Now water is the most
receptive of the four elements.
Mr. Emoto thought,
perhaps it would
respond to non-physical events.
So he set up a
series of studies,
applied mental stimuli,
and photographed it
with a microscope.
>> [SPEAKING JAPANESE]
>> One sample of water, we
dropped about 0.5 CCs onto each
50 Petri dishes.
Then we take those
50 Petri dishes
and freeze them in a
freezer at minus 25 degrees
Celsius for about three hours.
We take those frozen
samples into a refrigerator
that is set at minus 5
degrees Celsius where
a microscope with
a camera is set up.
There we take photographs
of each of the 50 water
drops individually.
We first take
photographs of water
that we did not put
any information in.
Then, we take the
water with information
and do the same
procedure just described.
We take those before
and after photographs
and compare the differences.
When we projected the feeling
of love and thanks to water,
it made the most
beautiful crystal.
Times like this, I
think water is at peace.
>> This first picture is
a picture of water from
the Fujiwara dam.
And this picture
is the same water
after receiving a blessing
from a Zen Buddhist monk.
Now in this next
series of pictures,
Mr. Emoto printed
out words, taped them
to bottles of distilled water,
and left them out overnight.
This first photograph is a
picture of the pure distilled
water, just the
essence of itself.
These subsequent
photographs, as you can see,
are each different.
This is the "Chi of Love."
And we move along
here to "Thank You."
And you can see where he taped
that to this bottle here.
But if you read Japanese,
you already knew that.
Now, Mr. Emoto speaks
of the thought or intent
being the driving
force in all of this.
The science of how that
actually affects the molecules
is unknown, except to the
water molecules, of course.
And it's really
fascinating when you
keep in mind that 90%
of our bodies are water.
>> It makes you
wonder, doesn't it?
If thoughts could
do that to water,
imagine what our
thoughts can do to us.
>> One of the most interesting
experiments with random event
generators occurred when
it was really out of time.
Some Princeton investigators
and some of the other ones
decided that they would
try to see whether or not
you could affect a random
machine after it had run.
So they converted it,
instead of having a computer
with a visual screen, they had
a computerized situation that
was audiotapes.
And they had it with
clicks in the left ear
and clicks in the right ear.
And they already played
this with nobody listening
to it so that it already ran.
They put that in a
vault and they then
gave the tape, the already
run tape to a participant
and said, take it home.
I want you to listen to it.
And I want you to make more
left ear clicks than right ear
clicks with it.
Send your intention to it.
So the person did, they
handed back the tape,
and they played it
and lo and behold,
and they played the
one in the vault, too.
And they discovered that they
were both the same and they
both had more left
clicks than right clicks.
So what was going on here?
Well, it wasn't as though the
person who was the participant
had actually affected it at the
moment he was listening to it.
His thoughts and
his attention had
moved back down the
timeline and affected it
at the moment it was generated.
>> Most people don't affect
reality in a consistent,
substantial way because
they don't believe they can.
>> Whatever way we observe the
world around us is what comes
back to us.
And the reason why my
life, for instance,
is so lacking in joy and
happiness and fulfillment
is because my focus is lacking
in those same things exactly.
If we're victims, we
should ask ourselves
have I a victim mentality?
If I'm continually meeting
misfortunes and accidents
and tragedies, maybe
it's because my mentality
is basically attuned to
accepting that this is the way
life is, and so it happens.
Now, why can I not
achieve those things?
Fundamentally,
through lack of focus.
>> The average person loses
their attention span every six
to 10 seconds per minute.
>> When one wants
to focus intent,
you want to be a
singleness of mind.
That's why some of the
old occult teachings
teach people to focus on a
flame, a match flame, in fact,
so that you learn to bring
your attention into a very
sharp channel so that the
energy density becomes greater.
>> The mind is
structured in layers,
just like the universe
is structured in layers,
from superficial to profound.
And if we use the mind in
a very superficial level
of ordinary thought, we
have very limited power,
we can barely move a speck
of dust across a tabletop
without using our hands, so
weak can consciousness be.
But at the deepest
level of consciousness,
consciousness creates universes.
>> But we always
wonder then, don't we,
when we wish for all of those to
be able to heal with the touch
and to raise the dead and
to manifest a loaf of bread
in our hand, we always
wonder why we can't do that.
But we can never ask a
question that we don't already
know the answer to.
And the answer is it's because
we don't believe we could do it
and it interferes
with our agenda,
of our own personal
addictions that define us.
We have never had enough
time to care for anyone
else other than our own
emotional addictive needs.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi.
How was the shoot?
>> Fine.
>> Your boss called.
He's worried about you.
Amanda, I want to thank you
for letting me stay here.
I know I'm a bit much
sometimes and that it's
been tough after Bob and all.
And you've just
been so wonderful.
I mean, I make a mess and,
well, I clean up afterwards.
But it's not really your style.
>> Sometimes I think
you make me sane.
>> Me?
[LAUGHS]
The day I make someone
sane, they're in trouble.
Anyway, I made you something
as a thank you gift.
Open it.
I went through your pictures
and picked my favorite ones.
And it took me forever because
there's so many good ones.
This, that's for all
the wonderful photos
you will be taking.
Oh.
>> I've had a strange day.
Thank you.
>> If thoughts can
do that to water,
imagine what our
thoughts can do to us.
>> --what thoughts are made of.
Is there a substance of thought?
[POPPING]
>> This is a dream
that I'm dreaming.
Just as in a dream, you dream
different characters can emerge
and come out to you and
talk to you and meet you
and so forth, it's
possible to go
to another level
of dreaming where
you can become each of the
characters that you dream.
>> Go backward and
forward in time.
>> Time is relative.
>> It goes backwards.
It goes backwards in time,
then forward in time.
>> Time is not absolute.
>> --quantum information.
>> Time reversal symmetry.
>> Of course, we can go
backward and forward in time.
>> --random even generators
occurred, which is--
>> Are all realities in
the quantum field existing
simultaneously?
>> The actual event
of experience.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> There literally are different
worlds in which we live.
There's the macroscopic
world that we see.
There's the world of our cells.
There's the world of our
atoms, the world of our nuclei.
These are each totally
different worlds.
They have their
own language, they
have their own mathematics.
They're not just smaller,
each is totally different,
but they're complementary.
Because I am my atoms
but I am also my cells.
I'm also my
macroscopic physiology.
It's all true, there are just
different levels of truth.
The deepest level
of truth uncovered
by science and by philosophy is
the fundamental truth of unity.
At that deepest subnuclear
level of our reality,
you and I are literally
one, one, one.
>> This gradually led into
some notions that there was
an invisible connection
between everything.
Physicists give this a name.
They call it entanglement.
>> As Einstein put it, he didn't
believe that quantum mechanics
could be true because it
required that there be "spooky
action at a distance."
That was his term.
And what he meant
is that when we
have our ordinary sense of the
way that the fabric of reality
is, it seems like these two
places are absolutely in space,
they're separate, and
never the twain shall meet.
But in fact, it's not true.
At some deeper level that
we can't see with our eyes
very clearly, two places
in space are the same.
They're co-located, coexisting.
So if we imagine
that common sense,
the way common sense
literally meaning
what your senses tell
you about the world,
if that's the way the world
is actually constructed,
then things like psychic
and mystical experience
don't make any sense at all.
Because the whole point about
psychic and mystical experience
that makes them
strange is the sense
that there's some kind of
connection between what's
going on inside
your head and things
elsewhere, elsewhere
in space and in time.
So what this view of
quantum mechanics provides
is a way of framing what these
strange experiences are like.
And it reframes it from
somehow, magically, information
is getting inside my head
from signals or forces
or something into
a different view,
which is that, in a sense,
your head, yes, is here,
but it's also spread out, spread
out through space and time.
And so when I'm able to
get a telepathic impression
from somebody at
a distance, it's
not because I somehow
jumped out there and got it,
but because at some deep level,
my head and the other person's
head are co-located.
>> We become entangled all
the time when you communicate
telepathically.
Those experiences
are so striking.
I literally can
read your thoughts
if I become entangled with you.
And such things happen,
there are distant viewing
experiments.
There are even
experiments now that you
are seeing light flashes, that
your brain potential picks up
the signature of those
light flashes, what
is called evoked
potential, that can
be measured in an EEG machine
connected to your brain.
And I am sitting over
there no light flashes,
I cannot see you, and
still my brain potentials,
because I am correlated with
you in terms of intention,
I intend to be directly
communicated with
your experiences, that
intention produces me,
gives me the capability
of simultaneously having
the similar brain
potential in my brain.
It was first done
by Jacobo Grinberg
at the University
of Mexico, and now
repeated by Peter
Fenwick in London.
>> The day should
be the sunrise.
It should be the beginning
of great thought.
>> I wake up in the morning
and I consciously create my day
the way I want it to happen.
Now, sometimes because my mind
is examining all the things
that I need to get done,
it takes me a little bit
to settle down and get to the
point of where I'm actually
intentionally creating my day.
But here's the thing,
when I create my day
and, out of nowhere,
little things happen
that are so
unexplainable, I know
that they are the process or
the result of my creation.
And the more I do
that, the more I
build a neural net
in my brain that I
accept that that's possible.
It gives me the power
and the incentive
to do it the next day.
>> And we all create
our own realities.
And we do that because
we are the observer.
We are each the own
observer of our own reality.
And each of our
individual consciousnesses
creates our own
individual reality
in the most amazing way.
My son, Evan, the
physicist says, no, it's
an additive thing.
I mean, if I'm
holding one reality
and someone else is
holding another reality.
I mean, it's the Super
Bowl this afternoon.
And the reality that
the Eagles are holding
is a different reality than
what the Patriots are holding.
And only one of
those realities are
going to be the real reality.
So there's some
additive and there
are interference patterns.
>> Well, I think if we
keep quantum physics
and the understanding very
simple for the layperson,
that our observation has a
direct effect on our world,
I think if we keep
it very simple,
then people can get about
the business of beginning
to practice the
skill of observation.
See, the subatomic world
responds to our observation,
but the average person loses
their attention span every six
to 10 seconds per minute.
So that doesn't leave a lot of
room for our attention span.
So how can the
very large respond
to someone who doesn't
have the ability
to even focus and concentrate?
Maybe we're just poor observers?
Maybe we haven't mastered
the skill of observation.
And maybe it is a skill.
And maybe we're so addicted
to the external world
and so addicted to the
stimulus and response
of the external
world that the brain
is beginning to
work out of response
instead of out of creation.
If we're given the
proper knowledge
and the proper understanding and
given the proper instruction,
we should begin to see
measurable feedback
in our life.
If you make the effort to sit
down and design a new life
and you made it the
most important thing
and you spend time every day
feeding it like a gardener
feeds a seed, you
will produce fruit.
>> We are running a holodeck.
We are collectively, it's there.
It has such flexibility, but
anything you can imagine,
it will create.
And you learn, I
mean, your intention
causes this thing to materialize
once you're conscious enough.
>> Yeah, so what
is consciousness?
>> What is consciousness?
>> Well, consciousness is a
very difficult thing to define.
What is consciousness?
Where does it come from?
People have been trying
to explain consciousness
and trying to figure
out what exactly it is,
what it means for
us as human beings,
and why we even have it.
A simple way of defining it is
it has to do with awareness.
And in particular, it has to
do with awareness of the self.
That's at least how
we as human beings
have self-consciousness so
that when we look in a mirror
we recognize that it's
ourselves that we're
looking at and not some other
person or some other animal.
>> And do you think science
will understand it better than
having to handle a hot potato
called consciousness that has
so much cultish religion
backwater voodoo attached
to it?
>> Consciousness has been
left out of the equations
of physics, in general, as
well as quantum physics,
for a very simple reason.
It's easier to do
things that way.
[SHUTTERS SNAPPING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I hate weddings.
A wedding?
Come on, Frank.
>> This is a good assignment,
if you'd see it that way.
>> What's to see?
I do.
They did.
>> Ah, God, Amanda, I mean,
you live in your past.
I mean, everything with
you is about what happened.
You hate churches.
You hate weddings.
You hate guys.
>> Consciousness, we have
great trouble defining it.
To me, consciousness
is a byproduct
of spirit entering dense matter.
But we have a long, long way to
grow before we get to the stage
where it is meaningful for
us to ask the question,
will we know God?
>> Most people think of God as
that great figure in the sky
with the white beard who's
scrutinizing the human race
from above.
They see us here on Earth as
in some form of neutral testing
ground where we're placed
by God for a period
and God watches from
above, registering
the scores on his laptop, as
to whether we perform according
to his designs or whether we're
offending him, as it's put--
an absolutely outrageous idea.
How could we offend
God, the type of God
that people believe in?
How could it matter
so much to him?
How could it, above all,
matter that he would find it
so serious a situation
that he could condemn us
to an eternity of suffering?
These are bizarre ideas.
But obviously, they
have a great hold
on the fears and the limitations
and the insecurities of people,
which is why
religion can play so
effectively, whether
deliberately or otherwise,
on those insecurities.
People fall into
line very readily
when they're threatened
by these cosmic sentences
of everlasting punishment.
>> How in the 10 commandments
could we have possibly created
a mind that could
transcend space and time?
No, we're too busy keeping
our emotions in check
to ever dream of
infinite possibilities.
And maybe that is the
ultimate conspiracy.
>> Even though a given person
may have long ago thrown off
the trappings of religion, they
still live in the religious
mold and they
don't even know it.
But their whole conception
of how reality works
is all something that has
been molded by religion.
So until you get that
out of your system,
you can't ever make a go of
an evolutionary perspective.
One of the problems
with organized religions
is that there is this
sense of separateness,
that it's only good
to be a Protestant
or that people who are Catholics
are the only people who
know the way.
And I think now our current
understanding of quantum
physics is this understanding
of complete unity
and so that we have to
derive our spirituality
from a sense of unity.
>> This is the basic
journey of spirituality,
when we ask the question why
am I feeling separate all
the time.
>> Speaking of God always
conjures up the idea of the old
guy with the white beard in
the cloud judging, observing,
punishing, rewarding,
or giving commands.
Once you're on
that track, you're
totally off the path
of spiritual evolution
and development.
The great appeal
of all to people
who don't want to grow up
but want the great parent
in the sky looking after them
is to ask Jesus to do it for me.
If only I'd place
my trust in Jesus,
he will save me from my
sins and look after me
and all will be well.
Well, Jesus cannot eat my lunch
for me and Jesus cannot be born
for me and neither
can Jesus save me.
Because what we're talking
about in real terms
is not being saved by any
one, god or otherwise,
we are talking about
personal evolution.
>> The only reason that there
is an addiction to religion is
some way out of a mistake.
Does that diminish
the greatness of God?
No, it actually opens
the corral and lets
God be eternal, absolute.
The law that is given
to us is the same laws
given to that of those
people on Sirius,
given to us by the
people in the rho's
universe or the R-universe.
You know, your Hubble
telescope has finally
seen galaxies of immeasurable
beauty that in our heart
and in our mind,
we long to engage.
It's exciting to be beings of
greater mind or lesser mind.
Where does it end?
Does it end?
>> We do not want to
accept responsibility.
We do not want to
accept our greatness.
So it's very easy for
any system of thought,
religious or otherwise
that comes along,
it's very easy to play on that,
to play on our insecurities,
to assure us all is well
we'll all be taken care of.
We lap that up.
Do not blame religion,
blame our own insecurities
which has allowed
religion to flourish
and which has allowed so
many systems of thought
that are disempowering
to flourish
throughout human history.
That's why we can't
get out of it.
>> I now present to you Mr. And
Mrs. Richard Buck Philipowski.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC - MENDELSSOHN, "WEDDING
MARCH"]
>> Experiencing something in the
present day that is a trigger
to something that is very
emotionally charged for us,
so now we have become even more
disconnected from the reality
of what actually is.
>> A dream, like a
thunderstorm in our brain,
in its electrical strikes
through our synaptic skies
to the Earth of our being,
creates a chemical cascade
in our body that prepares
our body for conquest,
achievement or relishing
experience emotionally.
But we would have
no conquest, indeed,
we would have no relishment
if we had not first
had that hologram and those
chemicals that made us--
or rather changed us from
being fearful entities
into fearless entities
after a dream.
The frontal lobe is the crowning
achievement of the human brain,
the frontal lobe.
This frontal lobe allows
us a distinguishness
to change our minds.
>> Through the workings
of the nervous system
and the particular way that
it implements quantum effects,
very distinct specific way,
not general, not fuzzy,
not imprecise, that it
absolutely does open the door
for free will being a
possibility that does not
violate modern scientific
tenets and that's consistent,
to a certain extent, with
people's subjective impression
that we do have free will.
>> What separates us from all
other species is the ratio
of our frontal lobe to
the rest of the brain.
The frontal lobe is an
area of the brain that's
responsible for firm
intention, for decision
making, for regulating
behavior, for inspiration.
It is the seat of what
causes us to take information
from our environment and process
it and store it in our brain
to make decisions
or choices that
are different than the
decisions and choices
that we've made in the past.
The brain is made up of tiny
nerve cells called neurons.
These neurons have
tiny branches that
reach out and connect to other
neurons to form a neural net.
Each place where they
connect is integrated
into a thought or a memory.
Now, the brain builds
up all its concepts
by the law of
associate of memory,
for example, ideas,
thoughts, and feelings
are all constructed
and interconnected
in this neural net and all
have a possible relationship
with one another.
The concept and the
feeling of love,
for instance, is stored
in this vast neural net.
But we build the
concept of love from
many other different ideas.
Some people have love
connected to disappointment.
When they think about
love, they experience
the memory of pain, sorrow,
anger, and even rage.
Rage may be linked
to hurt which may
be linked to a specific person
which then is connected back
to love.
>> Every observation can
be looked upon as a quantum
measurement.
This quantum measurement
produces memory.
We always perceive
something after reflection
in the meter of memory.
It is this reflection
in the meter of memory
that gives us that sense
of I-ness, who I am.
>> The brain does not know the
difference between what it sees
in its environment and what
it remembers because the same
specific neural nets
are then firing.
We know physiologically that
nerve cells that fire together,
wire together.
If you practice something
over and over again,
those nerve cells have a
long-term relationship.
If you get angry
on a daily basis,
if you get frustrated
if you suffer on a daily
basis, if you give reasons
for the victimization
in your life,
you're rewiring
and reintegrating
that neural net
on a daily basis.
And that neural net now has
a long-term relationship
with all those other nerve
cells called an identity.
We also know that nerve cells
that don't fire together,
no longer wire together.
They lose their
long-term relationship.
Because every time we
interrupt the thought process,
that produces a chemical
response in the body.
Every time we interrupt
it, those nerve cells
that are connected to
each other start breaking
the long-term relationship.
>> If we practice our mental
rehearsal and our skill
in being able to do it,
we'll show that certain brain
circuits will grow as
a result of our effort.
It will get easier to
do, in other words.
If we accept that
idea, then it will
allow us to go back the next day
and do it with more certainty
and with more acceptance.
That, in itself, is no
different than praying.
You see, there's no
religious text that
says thought doesn't matter.
There's no religious text
that doesn't say your prayer
and your intention shouldn't
be answered by god.
But explaining how
that happens is
what quantum physics and
the observer is all about.
But still, when we
can make thought
more real than anything
else, our brain
is designed to do that.
The frontal lobe with
this enormous space
is the alter in which
we place a thought.
And it gives us the
permission to hold the thought
for an extended period of time.
And it lowers the volume
to external stimuli.
We lose track of time and space.
That's the moment we're
stepping into the quantum field.
That's the moment that
now we're making thought
more real than anything else.
[ROCK MUSIC]
>> We are physically,
chemically,
emotional human beings.
It's not a bad thing.
It only becomes
a limitation when
we keep accessing
those same emotions
and those same attitudes
on a daily basis
and go nowhere in terms
of our change or evolution
in our life.
>> How can we say that we have
lived fully every day by simply
experiencing the same emotions
that we're addicted to every
day.
What we're actually saying
is I have to reconfirm
who I am and my personality is.
I have to do this, I have to
go here, I have to be that.
A master is quite
a different cat.
It is one that sees the day
as an opportunity in time
to create avenues of
reality and emotions
that are unborn, of
realities that are unborn,
that the day becomes
a fertilization
of infinite tomorrows.
>> There's a part of the
brain called the hypothalamus.
And the hypothalamus is
like a little, mini factory.
And it is a place that
assembles certain chemicals that
matches certain emotions
that we experience.
And those particular
chemicals are
called peptides that are
small-chain amino acid
sequences.
The body is basically
a carbon unit
that makes about 20 different
amino acids all together
to formulate its
physical structure.
In the hypothalamus, we take
small-chain proteins called
peptides and we assemble them
into certain neuropeptides
or neurohormones that match
the emotional states that we
experience on a daily basis.
So there's chemicals
for anger and there's
chemicals for
sadness and there's
chemicals for victimization.
There's chemicals for lust.
There's a chemical that
matches every emotional state
that we experience.
And the moment that we
experience that emotional state
in our body or in our
brain, that hypothalamus
will immediately
assemble the peptide
that then releases it
through the pituitary
into the bloodstream.
The moment it makes it
into the bloodstream,
it finds its way to
different centers
or different parts of the body.
Now, every single
cell in the body
has these receptors
on the outside.
>> And one cell can have
thousands of receptors studding
its surface, kind of opening
up to the outside world.
And when a peptide
docks on a cell,
it, literally, like a
key going into a lock,
sits on the receptor
surface and attaches
to it and kind of
moves the receptor kind
of like a doorbell buzzing,
sends a signal into the cell.
[BUZZER SOUNDING]
>> It's party time!
[MUSIC - BOSTON, "MORE THAN A
FEELING"]
(SINGING) It's more
than a feeling.
More than a feeling.
When I hear that old
song they used to play.
More than a feeling.
And I begin dreaming.
More than a feeling. 'Til
I see Marianne walk away.
I see my Marianne walkin' away.
>> What happens in adulthood
is that most of us who have had
our glitches along the way
are operating in a emotionally
detached place or we're
operating as if today were
yesterday.
>> What is it?
>> Mixed.
[MUSIC - THE ROMANTICS, "WHAT I
LIKE ABOUT YOU"]
>> Change, in itself, means
that we have to abandon our old
self.
It means that we have to
leave behind our identity
for a few moments and begin
to speculate who we could be.
To change means
modifying our behavior
enough so that it's permanent.
(SINGING) Yeah.
Keep on whispering in my ear.
Tell me all the things that I
want to hear. 'Cause it's true.
That's what I like about you.
>> Our experiences
color what we know.
So there is no completely
objective appraisal
of anything.
Because our appraisal
of everything
has to do with our previous
experiences and our emotions.
Everything has an
emotional weighting to it.
>> We've gone from the
emotions being these spiritual,
immaterial things, thing
that are not even things,
to actual molecules with
molecular weights and peptides
with sequences and structures.
>> Science knows now that
the hypothalamus makes neural
peptides and those neural
peptides are strong chemicals.
>> Well, here's the story
of the peptide and the cell.
The peptides find the
receptors and dock onto them
and stay attached.
Then they come off and then
they can come back on again.
And while they're there,
they are changing the cell.
A receptor that has a
peptide sitting in it
sets off a whole cascade
of biochemical events,
some of which changes
the nucleus of the cell.
Each cell is definitely
alive and each cell
has a consciousness,
particularly
if we define consciousness
as the point of view
of an observer.
There is always the
perspective of the cell.
The cell knows where it is.
The cell knows where it's going.
The cell knows what
proteins its making.
The cell knows whether
it's about to divide
or whether it's in a
program to stop dividing.
In fact, the cell
is the smallest unit
of consciousness in the body.
>> I'm hungry.
>> The cells are yelling
up to the brain saying--
>> Hungry!
>> "We haven't gotten
our fix today."
And it's going to start sending
impressions to the brain.
And the brain is going to
start to formulate imagery.
It's going to sound like
voices in our head--
>> I'm hungry.
>> --to think of a reason
why we should be depressed--
>> Yes, I'm hungry.
>> --to think of a reason
why we should be confused,
to think of a reason
for our own suffering.
And the body's going to be
telling the brain that it's not
getting its chemical needs met.
And so the brain will
then activate and start
going to our past situations
and flashing pictures
to our frontal lobe.
>> Oh, yeah.
We've commandeered an
entire serving platter.
[CHEERING]
Yeah, keep it coming.
Keep it coming.
>> This is good.
>> Oh, yeah.
[FARTS]
[BURP]
>> Well, my definition of an
addiction is something really
simple, something
that you can't stop.
We bring to ourselves
situations that
will fulfill the biochemical
craving of the cells
of our body by
creating situations
that meet our chemical need.
>> That always happens to me.
Why?
>> Everyday!
>> Why?
>> So my definition really
means that if you can't control
your emotional state, you
must be addicted to it.
>> Oh, this ruins everything.
>> People that we really love
are people who are willing
to share our emotional
needs, our feelings,
whatever they are,
whether they are sexual,
whether they are victimized,
"poor me, poor you."
Whether they are power,
you need somebody
to control you so you feel
like you're in control.
>> No, ma'am, don't dip
your half eaten shrimp back
into the cocktail sauce.
>> Screw you and
your health codes.
I am the bride's sister.
I'll stick my ass in
the cocktail sauce
if I damn well please.
>> What are you
standing there for?
Come on.
>> I want you to get
out there and serve.
Make sure everybody
has a full glass.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Fun, fun, fun.
>> Me show you what women want.
>> What is reality?
What is known as reality?
>> They have taken laboratory
animals and they've hooked up
electrodes in certain parts of
their brain that produce those
neural peptides.
And those neural peptides
are such strong chemicals
that given the fact that
they train the laboratory
animal to press the lever to
get that chemical release,
that neural peptide release, it
would choose the neuropeptide
release more than hunger, more
than sex, more than thirst,
more than sleep.
As a matter of fact,
it went to the point
of physical exhaustion and
collapsed before it would
take care of itself physically.
And that's really what
stress does to our body.
We become so addicted to
the stress in our lives
that we can't quit our job even
though it doesn't serve us.
We can't leave our relationship
because it doesn't serve us.
We can't make choices because
the stimulus and the responses
produce the chemistry
that clouds our choices
and we're no different than
the dog who lacks its ability
to make choices because of
its smaller frontal lobe.
>> So how can anyone really say
they're in love with a specific
person, for example?
They're only in love with the
anticipation of the emotions
they're addicted to.
Because the same person
could fall out of
favor the next week
by not complying.
[MUSIC - ANIMOTION, "OBSESSION"]
[MOANING]
(SINGING) Who do you want me to
be to make you sleep with me?
You're my obsession.
Who do you want me to be--
>> [MOANS]
>> Amanda!
(SINGING) I feed you.
I drink you by day and by night.
I need you.
I need you by sun
or candlelight.
You protest, you want to leave.
Stay, for there's
no alternative.
Your face appears again.
I see the beauty there.
But I see danger.
Stranger beware.
A circumstance--
>> How can you not freakin' see?
>> No, no, no, no, you
got the punchline wrong.
It's a photographer's joke.
Go on about your music.
[MUSIC - BAD COMPANY, "CAN'T GET
ENOUGH"]
Are you OK?
>> Well, I--
I saw that groom
humping some girl.
>> Uh, when?
>> Just now.
>> I was with the groom.
>> Hey, I can read lips.
>> Sorry.
I was with the groom just now.
He loves Paulette.
Where?
(SINGING) I can't get
enough of your love.
I can't get enough of your love.
>> Pollacks, they all
look the same in a tux.
>> Everybody secretly
is an adventurer.
Everybody loves the adventure.
It's just taking
that first step.
And once they have the moment of
insight, that moment of insight
carries frequency.
It carries a message.
The cells of the body are
enlivened by possibility.
They're enlivened by
unknown potentials.
They're enlivened by a future
history or a future opportunity
that may be down the rabbit
hole a little further.
And if they allow
themselves to experience
the quandary and the mysticism
and the possibility that when
they emerge from
the rabbit hole,
they're a different person
and now they go back
into their world, and
because they've processed
that information and left
footprints in the mind
and in the brain, their
perception of the world
will never be the same.
>> How can we say that we have
lived fully every day by simply
experiencing the same emotions
that we're addicted to every
day.
A master is quite
a different cat.
>> Have a drink?
>> It is one that sees the
day as an opportunity in time
to create avenues of reality
and emotions that are unborn
of the day become
infinite tomorrows.
>> To the groom.
[MUSIC - ZOMBIE NATION,
"KERNKRAFT 400"]
>> What's up, guys?
>> What's up, man.
>> Hello.
>> What do we need?
>> Some foxes.
>> Who out out.
>> Yeah, baby.
>> Yes, it's a
psychosomatic network.
And yes, some of us,
you know, particularly
adolescent boys are under
the control of lower centers.
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
The eye isn't in control of
the molecules of emotion,
it's more, I don't want
to say at the mercy of it,
but these rapid
eye movements that
help us decide where to focus
are mediated in the midbrain.
And you can map opiate
receptors there and receptors
for many of the other peptides.
So once again, the relevant
search command that's going on
is related to finding a
certain emotional state.
>> Oh, god, she wouldn't
fall for me, no.
>> Ooh, mama!
Whew!
What the hell are
you waiting for?
Come on, you little pussies.
Jeez, I can't believe you guys.
What are you - ooooo.
Come on, come on, yeah, just
get the hell out of the way.
Hi there, honey.
Come on, baby, you
know you want it.
Oh, don't give me that look.
>> What about people
who are addicted to sex?
>> Actually, sex itself is an
invention to allow us to see
into the future.
Think about that for a while.
[GROANING]
[MUSIC - ROBERT PALMER,
"ADDICTED TO LOVE"]
>> Whoa!
Whew!
>> Hello there, big boy.
Is that a rocket in
your pocket or are you
just happy to see me?
Whew!
[LAUGHING AND SCREAMING]
>> (SINGING) The lights are
on, but you're not home.
Your mind is not your own.
Your heart sweats,
your body shakes.
Another kiss is what it takes.
You can't sleep.
You can't eat.
There's no doubt,
you're in deep.
Your throat is tight.
You can't breathe.
Another kiss is all you need.
Whoa, you like to think that
you're immune to the stuff,
oh yeah.
It's closer to the truth--
[BURP]
>> I want to hear
some polka music, OK?
>> Fine, I'm gonna
play the polka music.
>> These people want to
hear some polka music.
>> I know, I'm
going to play some.
I'm gonna play it!
>> You can't have a Polish
wedding without polka music!
>> (SINGING) Might as well face
it, you're addicted to love.
Might as well face
it, you're addicted--
>> No, would you leave it alone.
Give me a [BLEEP].
>> How can you have a polish
wedding without any [BLEEP]
Polish music!
>> Get your [BLEEP] hands
off my equipment, [BLEEP]..
>> Whoa!
[SHATTERING]
[TRAIN WHISTLE BLOWS]
>> It ain't a Polish
wedding without polka.
[POLKA MUSIC]
[MUSIC - AEON SPOKE, "EMMANUEL"]
(SINGING) When your road deserts
you and your feet disappear,
you'll find some orchards.
Wasted one without appeal,
where will you go from here?
>> Our mind literally
creates our body.
>> But it all
starts in the cell.
And who gives the
cells the order?
The orders come from the
neural net in our brain
which are based on the
experiences and information
that we've logged in there.
And we use a certain
box of solutions
to our life that causes
chemistry to take place.
So in order for us to
change the chemistry,
we would literally have to
change the neural net which
means we'd have to
change our identity which
change our attitude
or change the way in which we
interact with our environment.
And every time we keep
being the same person
and keep experiencing the same
attitudes, all we're doing
is reinforcing ourselves
as our identity.
>> I once did a little
gig in a women's prison.
They were all heroin addicts.
And by teaching them that they
have receptors for the heroin
and that the more
heroin that they take,
their ability to make their
own internal endorphins,
their own internal heroin,
basically, starts to decline.
And then their receptors
start to become sub sensitive
or there's actually
less of them.
So there's these actual changes.
And then this new information
about how less brain cells are
being made so that people get
kind of, in all addictions,
they get stuck in old patterns.
>> The person's mental life
becomes dominated by pain such
that everything that
they perceive is colored
by the pain.
And sometimes every
way that they react
and everything that they do
becomes all about their pain.
>> One of the things about
receptors is they change
in their sensitivity.
If a given receptor for a
given drug or internal juice
is being bombarded for a long
time at a high intensity,
it will literally shrink up.
There will be less of them or it
will be hooked up in such a way
that it is desensitized
or down regulated.
So the same amount of
drug or internal juice
will elicit a much
smaller response.
[ELECTRICITY CRACKLING]
>> Oh, god!
No!
[EXPLOSION]
[WHISTLING]
[SCREAMING]
[GUNSHOTS]
[WHISTLING]
>> Ah!
>> If we're bombarding the
cell with the same attitude
and the same chemistry over and
over again on a daily basis,
when that cell finally
decides to divide,
when it produces a sister
cell or a daughter cell,
that next cell will have
more receptor sites for those
particular emotional neural
peptides and less receptor
sites for vitamins, minerals,
nutrients, fluid exchange,
or even the release of
waste products or toxins.
Now, all aging is a result of
improper protein production.
What happens when we age?
Our skin loses elasticity.
Well, elastin is a protein.
What happens to our enzymes?
We don't digest as well.
What happens to
our synovial fluid?
Those are proteins that
become brittle and stiff.
What happens to our bones?
They become thin.
So all aging is a result of
improper protein production.
So then the question
arises, does it really
matter what we eat?
Does nutrition really have an
effect if the cell doesn't even
have the receptor sites after
20 years of emotional abuse
to even receive or let
in the nutrients that
are necessary for its health?
>> If we know the
thoughts of a person,
we will best know them
by their addiction,
their continuous over 24 hours
in a continuum of what emotions
they display in their body,
we shall know their thoughts.
>> I hate you.
>> We never, ever reincarnate
to the "I love you so much
people."
We always reincarnate
to the situations
of why we hate ourself.
>> I hate you.
[SCREAMS]
You idiot!
You suck!
Look at you, you're ugly!
You are worth nothing!
You're getting old!
I hate you!
>> It makes you
wonder, doesn't it?
If thoughts can
do that to water,
imagine what thoughts
can do to us.
>> No one has ever came along
and ever given you sufficient,
intelligent knowledge
about your beautiful self,
how you work from
the inside out.
Why do you have addictions?
Because you have nothing better.
You have dreamed of nothing
better because no one has ever
taught you how to dream better.
>> There's data now that when
people are addicted to whether
it's cocaine, heroin,
nicotine, alcohol,
all of them seem to share a
property of blocking the growth
of new brain cells.
And yet, it can
completely come back
when the drug
taking has stopped.
>> Oh, poopy.
>> If you don't see the traps,
you have to go through the crap
until you see the traps.
Because if you don't
see it, it's you're
only teaching machine.
It's your only way
for you to come
to understand something new.
So the universe brings
these things to your door.
And there is learning
in them for you
if you are willing
to reflect upon them
and think beyond
the rigid mindset.
>> Can I--
Wow.
--borrow some toothpaste?
Thanks.
>> When I talk about
we disappearing,
I don't mean that we
physically disappear.
What I mean is that we move out
of the area of the brain that
has to do with our
personality, that
association to people,
our association to places, our
association to things and times
and events.
We don't exist in the
associative centers
in our brain that
reaffirms our identity
and reaffirms our personality.
>> We now have science to back
up what our thoughts do and how
they make our bodies weak.
A lot of scientists are
actually studying this
with behavioral
kinesiology and other ways,
showing that thoughts
make your body weak
and thoughts pretty much
create your reality.
They create what you're going
to think about yourself.
If you're fat but you
think you're wonderful,
you'll be wonderful.
But most women, we're
compared all the time
with impossible images
from Barbie to models.
And so we think that our
whole currency is how we look
and how other people are
going to perceive us.
And we're always up against
impossible standards.
>> What is relative to their own
emotional addiction are movies
and dramas and news and all
the media that is so beautiful
today and providing people
with experiences without having
to be there.
And yet, and yet, that does
not define human greatness.
>> They're so hypnotized by
their environment through
the media, through television,
through people living
and creating ideals that
everybody struggles to become
that no one can actually become
in terms of physical appearance
and definitions of beauty and
valor that are all illusions
that most people surrender and
live their life in mediocracy.
And they may live that life
and the soul may never really,
their desire may never
really rise to the surface.
So they may want to
be something else.
But if it does
rise to the surface
and they ask themselves
if there is something more
or why am I here, what
is the purpose of life,
where am I going, what
happens when I die--
they start to ask
those questions.
They start to flirt and
interact with the perception
that they may be having
a nervous breakdown.
And in reality,
what they're doing
is that they're old concepts
of how they view their life
and the world start
to fall apart.
>> That's why very few
people make this journey.
Because it's deeply unsettling.
All of the molds that we have
lived by have to be broken.
And we have to liberate
ourselves in this way.
And sometimes there's
an awkward period
between the comfort
that we knew before
and the real state
of comfort when
we are the lord of
our being, which
follows that interval of chaos.
Most people, when they
get into the chaos
give up hope and go back to
the old, false securities.
They get to live
a reasonable life.
And they get to die
in some sort of peace,
but they haven't advanced
spiritually at all
in that experiment
that we called a life.
>> We're in completely new
territory in our brain.
And because we're in
completely new territory,
we're rewiring the
brain, literally
reconnecting to a new
concept, then, ultimately,
it changes us from
the inside out.
If I change my mind,
will I change my choices?
If I change my choices,
will my life change?
Why can't I change?
What am I addicted to?
What will I lose that I'm
chemically attached to?
And what person, place,
thing, time, or event
that I'm chemically attached
to that I don't want
to lose because I may
have to experience
the chemical
withdrawal from that?
Hence, the human drama.
>> This life is but a page in an
enormous book in which we will
always be who we are, but always
with the inherent needling
of ambitious pursuit, a pursuit
that takes us from the boring
tedium of self
reflection, of self hate,
and to self creation
of new dreams.
And we are ambitious gods.
>> Well, it's the only planet
in the Milky Way that has
habitation that is steeped
in enormous subjugation
of religion?
Do you know why that is?
It's because people have
set up right and wrong.
>> I did say there is
no right and wrong.
Does that mean that
it's a free for all?
Absolutely not.
I mean, the problem that I
have with right and wrong
in those categories is not
that I want a free for all,
but that right and wrong
doesn't go nearly far enough.
>> They have never sinned.
They have never wronged.
Wronged, yes, in moral
confrontations with society.
But that's their adversity.
That's why they're
here, to wrong,
to learn, search, and
use the wisdom of that
to create yet greater dreams.
>> There's nobody
keeping records up there,
the records are here.
And I'm going to have
to deal with them.
That's far more
painful than a record
keeping God up in the skies.
So anyone who's setting out
on the path of enlightenment
will be absolutely impeccable
in everything that they do.
Is it because of
fear of damnation?
No.
Or of the punishment of God
or because I have sinned
and haven't got forgiveness?
No, no, no,
I mean, these are all
excuses that keeps us away
from the problem.
The really enlightened
person will
see every action has a reaction
with which I must deal.
And if I am wise,
I'm not going to do
stuff that will cause me to
have to face it and resolve it
and balance in my soul later.
That's the real criterion.
>> That God or the
fundamental level of reality,
depending on what people
describe, really, I mean,
theoretically, you
should be everywhere.
It's something exactly
how it would manifest
or how god would
manifest in the world
is a more complicated issue.
But I think that
certainly, from a more
traditional religious
perspective,
people have kind of gotten
away from God the person.
>> There's been a great shift
from God up there or out there
or in there, wherever,
to the god within.
And that's an improvement.
But we don't want
to get some idea
that God can be within and
still be separate, which
is what most people think.
They think the god
within is like some
of those alien movies, you know,
where some being breaks out
from my chest.
God is not within in
that stupid sense.
What it means is that in God, we
live, move, and have our being,
that we are ourselves,
in fact, are divine.
>> What's the relation between
my god self and your god self?
There is no relationship because
there's only one god self.
It's in both of us.
>> All people are divine people.
Is it not ironic
that all would say
that this is the voice of the
devil or that this is heresy?
If this is heresy, then
what is promised to everyone
is an imbuement with
God that is inseparable.
>> Knowledge allows the brain
to begin to become wired.
And we will begin to see
what has always existed.
But because we live in those
routine automatic programs
or unable to see because
we're processing mind
from the familiar, to
learn knowledge means
we're learning new things.
And to learn new
things means we're
gathering information and
creating the circuitry now
to begin to develop
the sensitivity
to begin to see things
for the first time.
>> There is enormous potential
to change the kind of behaviors
and characteristic patterns
that we've fallen into.
In fact, if you've listened
and have remembered anything
that I've said, your
physiology is different
than it was before that.
That is something that Eric
Kandel, the recent winner
of the Nobel Prize in
medicine of science,
said very eloquently at a
talk, that, basically, memory
has been encoded, your
genetic structure has changed.
And while we previously would
talk about the nervous system
as this very rigid
thing that didn't
have much capacity
for change, we
now know that, on many
levels, that isn't true.
And actually, there's
a tremendous amount
of plasticity, which basically
means ability to change,
within the nervous system.
>> And if you look at the
structure of the human brain
in detail, you see that it's
actually specifically designed,
it's carefully engineered to
experience the unified field,
to experience the unity of life.
>> We are all connected.
I mean, I think the most
fundamental thing is we're all
connected by an energy field.
We swim in a sea of
light, basically,
which is the zero point field.
And I say, first
of all, you have
to get away from the whole
idea of separateness.
Because separateness is the
biggest problem in the world
now.
>> You take this notion of
an entangled universe and you
apply it to human experience
because human experience is
part of the universe as well.
And you say, well, let's assume
that experience is entangled,
then how would it manifest?
And we can start
going through ways
in which it could manifest.
If there's a connection
with another mind,
we call it telepathy.
If there's a connection to some
other object somewhere else,
we call it clairvoyance.
If there's a connection that
happens to transcend time,
we call it precognition.
If there's a connection in which
my intention is expressed out
in the world some
way, we might call it
psychokinesis or distant healing
or something of that sort.
So you can go through
a list of perhaps 12
kinds of psychic experience
that have gotten labels
over the years, like telepathy.
But this is really just
the tip of the iceberg.
>> People ask why are you so
interested in the Planck scale,
the very ultimately tiny
in terms of spirituality.
Because obviously spirituality
is out there, it's everywhere.
And the answer is
that, yes, the Planck
scale is ultimately small,
but it's also everywhere.
Wherever you go, there it is.
And because it's
holographic and repeats
at different scales
like fractals
throughout the universe.
>> I would say that what quantum
physics is to the 20th century,
whatever is going to be
the new bridging of science
and spirituality, that will
be to the 21st century.
>> We are all
creating the future.
We are all creating
what is outside of us.
None of us are innocent
in that regard.
If there's something
out there we don't like,
we can't really
turn our backs on it
because we're co-creators
somehow or other.
And we have to do
the right things
to try to get the future
that is best for all of us.
>> We have talked so far about
the freedom of our own personal
life and quantum physics, that
we are freeing and freeing
and freeing our reality
to ultimate realities.
Yes, of course, they exist.
But after we have
accomplished them, what then?
What next?
When do we make the
shift from me to one?
When are we the
subconscious mind?
When are we the knowledge of
the one transpersonal self?
>> When you start to realize
what your true nature is,
there is no question and
there is no answer anymore.
And there is just the
sudden realization.
Now you come back
from the rabbit hole
and you start to perform in this
world of illusion and wonder
and magic with
that understanding
that you're never going to
die and you were never born.
>> Choice, by consciousness,
out of these possible events,
the actual event of
experience comes in.
And so for the first time,
science encounters free will.
Consciousness is
free because there
is no mathematical
description of the subject.
Only objects can be described
mathematically and only
to the extent that
they are possibilities.
The question still remains
paramount, who is the chooser?
>> Are all realities
existing simultaneously?
Is there a possibility that all
potentials exist side by side?
[WHOOSHING]
>> Welcome to flat land, a
world of only two dimensions,
only forwards and
backwards, left and right.
In this world, there
is no up and no down.
>> I said to Ray, where's Dotty?
He said, well,
she's out in line.
>> Ah!
>> Huh?
>> What is that?
What the bleep is that thing?
Huh?
>> In this world, the two
dimensional beings that live
here have no concept of
three dimensional objects.
These two-dimensional
flatlanders
have no understanding of cubes,
spheres, tetrahedrons or yours
truly.
From their 2D
perspective, my 3D finger
looks something like this.
[GASPING]
>> What the flat earth is that?
>> Did you see that?
Run!
Ah!
>> Hello, little circle.
>> Ah!
>> Uh-uh, fear of the
unknown or, should I say,
not yet known.
It's a puzzle.
If we see only what we
know, how does anyone ever
see anything new?
The unknown, how do we
ever get out of our box?
Hello, little circle.
[GASPING]
Don't be afraid.
>> Who said that?
Where are you?
>> This is always the
tricky part to explain.
I'm in another
dimension, another space.
I am above you.
>> Ah!
Never, never use that word.
>> What word?
>> The A-word.
>> Above?
>> Ah!
It's forbidden.
>> Well, what do
you think it means?
>> I don't know.
And I don't want to know.
You can be severely punished
if you use that word.
Are you a ghost?
>> I hope not.
I just have a different
perspective than you do.
I can see things in
a way you can't yet.
>> Oh, yeah?
Like what?
>> Well, OK, you have a
safe hidden in your pantry.
And inside it, you have 12
coins, a will, and a passport.
>> How did you know that?
What are you?
Are you a god?
>> Well, no more than you.
You see, since I am above you--
>> Ah!
>> --in the third dimension,
I can see inside things
in your world.
>> Third dimension?
You are a crazy ghost.
There's only two.
Look.
>> So if I were to tough
the inside of your stomach,
how would I do that?
>> Well, you'd have to
cut through my skin.
Otherwise, it's impossible.
>> Oh.
[LAUGHS]
Stop.
>> Ready for more?
>> More what?
>> Dimensions.
>> Oh.
>> Directions.
>> No.
Yes.
But-- But there aren't any more.
What will happen to me?
What will I become?
>> You'd have to
become it to know.
>> OK.
>> Excellent.
>> Oh.
I never knew.
>> Isn't it funny?
That which we are most afraid
of is what thrills us the most.
>> That has the effect of
randomizing their X-spins.
And nothing else interesting
happened to them after that.
OK.
Um, good.
It's an easy way to
get a laugh here.
>> So you can't ask them their
opinion because you know what
they're going to tell you.
You're starting
to act different.
I liked you better
the other way.
And that's a great sign
that you're making a change.
>> You can edit that, though,
if you had to, though,
couldn't you?
>> Not prettily.
[GRUNTS]
>> Who can do the Heimlich?
>> OK, are we rolling?
[SPEAKING JAPANESE]
>> I study quantum physics.
I sometimes teach it.
I have written a book on
quantum physics and many books
explicating the meaning
of quantum physics.
>> After my PhD from
Harvard, I went to CERN,
the European laboratory
for particle research.
But perhaps I'm best
known for the discovery
of the now famous "N equals 1
locally supersymmetric flipped
SU(5) grand unified
field theory.
>> Don't make the mistake of
thinking that the scientific
community is scientific.
[LAUGHING]
>> Two points.
First of all, I want to thank
David for healthy skepticism
is important.
And extraordinary claims
require extraordinary proof.
Now, the problem is that people
defending the conventional
approach to consciousness, brain
equals mind equals computer,
behave as if they've
got proof and we don't.
And they got [BLEEP].
OK?
>> Which formed the neural
nets in the first place,
which is what's the mind?
The mind-- thank you, this is
called divine intervention--
[LAUGHING]
From above.
But he has feet of clay.
>> I got involved with
this because my evidence--
No, start over.
OK.
>> Go back in time.
>> I can go back and fix that.
OK.
My name is Lynne McTaggart.
I'm author of a book
called "The Field."
>> I'm Dr. Daniel Monti.
I'm a physician with specialty
training in psychiatry
and human behavior.
I'm on the full-time faculty at
the Jefferson Medical College.
>> I've heard some people
say that, you know,
consciousness is this wonderful
property in the universe that
has a predilection
for the human brain.
If that's the case,
then consciousness
is about three pounds
and looks a little bit
like a gray cauliflower.
It's showtime.
>> I'll tell you a
little about myself.
Oh, the light is
blinking already.
See, this is what
happens whenever I speak.
Weird things happen.
OK.
All right, well.
When I hold it, it stays on.
What does that mean?
All right.
Oh, it's OK.
Maybe God wants me to meet you.
>> I actually did this at a
conference when we asked people
how many people have had a
gut feeling and so on, and 80%
of people say.
And then they say,
among those of you who
are very skeptical of
unconventional claims,
how many of you, meaning
like 30% of the audience who
doesn't believe in any of
this stuff, how many of you
guys have had interesting
gut feelings that
turned out to be right?
80%.
So when people are skeptical
about unusual things,
it's completely
understandable because there's
all kinds of nonsense out there.
But when you bring those
phenomena into the lab
and you exclude all of the
ordinary ways of understanding
them, it turns out that they
do have a psychic component.
>> Here we are actually
filming great thinkers.
Everyone in this room
is a great thinker now
that we've got them thinking.
That's always the
trick, isn't it?
>> You probably have
more to say about this.
>> No.
>> Sorry about that.
>> It's OK.
>> --multiple personality
disorder have to say about
the seat of consciousness?
And the second one is what
made you want to become
a physicist at the age of 50?
>> OK, well, I guess,
multiple personality disorder.
I actually wanted to
become a physicist as young
as the age of four,
believe it or not.
>> As we become more and
more inner self-managed,
we will manifest the qualities
of these deeper levels down
the rabbit hole.
And so we become a Qigong master
where we can influence things
from thousands of miles away.
>> So if we begin
to look at all that,
it seems to me the only way out
that I can understand is there
is an intelligent presence.
There is a kind of a one
mindedness that I call it,
or God, if you want
to call it that.
Ponder that for a while.
>> [LAUGHS]
That's perfect.
>> OK, um--
>> What did I say?
What are you gonna do with that?
A bite, he took a
bite out of nowhere.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[MUSIC - ELAINE HENDRIX,
"WHAT THE BLEEP?"]
(SINGING) Come on, it's
time to ride down the hole.
So say bye-bye to old
thoughts and paradigms.
Looky, looky, looky
what's inside your mind.
Sails are up, start your trip.
Feelings strike,
your memory's lit.
Now you're watching, thoughts
are talking over and over
and over and over.
What the bleep do we know?
What the, what the,
what the bleep?
Yesterday is everyday when
you decide to change the way,
you never meant to sit in place.
Listen, listen, listen
to create the day.
Charge the pod and take a dip.
Outside's in, the matter splits.
An observer takes it
further, over and over
and over and over.
What the bleep do we know?
What the, what the,
what the bleep?
How far down the rabbit
hole are you willing to go?
All that you will ever see is
more and more of a mystery.
What the bleep do we know?
What the, what the,
what the bleep?
What the bleep do we know?
Ponder if you will be ours.
Is god above or are you god?
What the bleep do we know?
There are no answers,
just decisions.
No right, no wrong,
take your position.
What the bleep?